ADDRESS MAPPING
A physical address is a local address. Its jurisdiction is a local network. It must be
unique locally, but is not necessarily unique universally.
The physical address and the logical address are two different identifiers. We need
both because a physical network such as Ethernet can have two different protocols at
the network layer such as IP and IPX (Novell) at the same time

Static mapping involves in the creation of a table that associates a logical address
with a physical address. This table is stored in each machine on the network.

This has some limitations because physical addresses may
change in the following ways:
1. A machine could change its NIC{network interface controller}, resulting in a new physical address.
2. In some LANs, such as LocalTalk, the physical address changes every time the
computer is turned on.
3. A mobile computer can move from one physical network to another, resulting in a
change in its physical address.

In dynamic mapping each time a machine knows one of the two addresses (logical
or physical), it can use a protocol to find the other one.

ARP (address resolution protocol)
Anytime a host or a router has an IP datagram to send to another host or router, it has the
logical (IP) address of the receiver. The logical (IP) address is obtained from the DNS
if the sender is the host or it is found in a routing table 
if the sender is a router. But the IP datagram must be encapsulated in a frame to be able to
pass through the physical network.The host or the router sends an ARP query packet. The packet includes
the physical and IP addresses of the sender and the IP address of the receiver. Because
the sender does not know the physical address of the receiver, the query is broadcast
over the network .

Cache Memory
If system A has to send packets to system B and it sends ARP reqest everyitme rather it can broadcast
files to network. So, it should rather save the address to its cache memory and hence from next time check
it any mapping is there. 

Operation                                                                                                           (why do we need physical add to pass packet)
Sender know IP of target
Sender send ARP request using  it, with sender IP, physical add and target IP but target physical add is 0
Message is passed to data link layer where encapsulated with physical add within frame, physical braodcast add as destination add
every host and router receive the arp req but only targeted has packet
targeted reply with physical add as arp reply
source receive add and IP datagram which has add , send encapsulated frame with destination add.


                                  Sender                                                                          Receiver
      
         CASE 1                 host                            same network                                       host    
                                ip map to mac is des add
      
      
      
         CASE 2                 host                             difff network                                      host 
                         ip in routing table or default router is to be mapped
       
       
       
         CASE 3                 router                            diff network                                      host
                                ip of next router is to be mapped
        
        
        
         CASE 4                 router                             same network                                    host
                                     dest ip add of ip datagram become ip to be mapped to physical add
                                     
                                     
 Proxy ARP       
 It is technique which create subnetting effect. Whenever a router running proxy ARP receives a ARP request for any host 
 among a set of host inder it, It sends it own physical add and whe get the IP packet it sends the packet to target host.
 
 Mapping Physical to Logical Address: RARP, BOOTP, and DHCP
There are occasions in which a host knows its physical address, but needs to know its
logical address. This may happen in two cases:
1. A diskless station is just booted. The station can find its physical address by checking
its interface, but it does not know its IP address.
2. An organization does not have enough IP addresses to assign to each station; it needs
to assign IP addresses on demand. The station can send its physical address and
ask for a short time lease.

Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) 

Each host or router is assigned one or more logical
(IP) addresses, which are unique and independent of the physical (hardware) address
To create an IP datagram, a host or a router needs to know its own IP
address or addresses. The IP address of a machine is usually read from its configuration
file stored on a disk file.

A RARP request is created and broadcast on the local network.
Another machine on the local network that knows all the IP addresses will respond with
a RARP reply. The requesting machine must be running a RARP client program; the
responding machine must be running a RARP server program.


BOOTP 
how a client can send an IP datagram when it knows neither
its own IP address (the source address) nor the server's IP address (the destination
address). The client simply uses all as as the source address and allIs as the destination
address.
One of the advantages of BOOTP over RARP is that the client and server are
application-layer processes. As in other application-layer processes, a client can be in
one network and the server in another, separated by several other networks. However,
there is one problem that must be solved. The BOOTP request is broadcast because the
client does not know the IP address of the server. A broadcast IP datagram cannot pass
through any router. To solve the problem, there is a need for an intermediary. One of the
hosts (or a router that can be configured to operate at the application layer) can be used
as a relay. The host in this case is called a relay agent. The relay agent knows the unicast
address of a BOOTP server. When it receives this type of packet, it encapsulates the
message in a unicast datagram and sends the request to the BOOTP server. The packet,
620 CHAPTER 21 NETWORK LAYER: ADDRESS MAPPING, ERROR REPORTING, AND MULTICASTING
carrying a unicast destination address, is routed by any router and reaches the BOOTP
server. The BOOTP server knows the message comes from a relay agent because one of
the fields in the request message defines the IP address of the relay agent. The relay
agent, after receiving the reply, sends it to the BOOTP client.        
         
DHCP
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
DHCP provides static and dynamic address allocation that can be manual or automatic.

Static Address Allocation
In this capacity DHCP acts as BOOTP does. It is backwardcompatible with BOOTP, which means a host running the BOOTP client can request a
static address from a DHCP server. A DHCP server has a database that statically binds
physical addresses to IP addresses.

Dynamic Address Allocation 
DHCP has a second database with a pool of available
IP addresses. This second database makes DHCP dynamic. When a DHCP client requests
a temporary IP address, the DHCP server goes to the pool of available (unused) IP
addresses and assigns an IP address for a negotiable period of time.         



The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP)
The IP protocol also lacks a mechanism for host and management queries. A host
sometimes needs to determine if a router or another host is alive. And sometimes a network administrator needs
information from another host or router.
The Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) has been designed to compensate
for the above two deficiencies. It is a companion to the IP protoco1.

Types of Messages
The error-reporting messages 
report problems that a router or a host (destination)
may encounter when it processes an IP packet.

The query messages,
which occur in pairs, help a host or a network manager get
specific information from a router or another host.


ICMP always reports error messages to the original source.

The following are important points about ICMP error messages:
o No ICMP error message will be generated in response to a datagram carrying an
ICMP error message.
D No ICMP error message will be generated for a fragmented datagram that is not
the first fragment.
D No IeMP error message will be generated for a datagram having a multicast
address.
D No ICMP error message will be generated for a datagram having a special address
such as 127.0.0.0 or 0.0.0.0.

Note that all error messages contain a data section that includes the IP header of the
original datagram plus the first 8 bytes of data in that datagram.

Destination Unreachable
When a router cannot route a datagram or a host cannot deliver a datagram, the datagram
is discarded and the router or the host sends a destination-unreachable message back to
the source host that initiated the datagram.

There is no communication between the
source host, which produces the datagram, the routers, which forward it, and the destination host, which processes it.

One of the ramifications of this absence of communication
is the lack offlow control.The source host never knows if it is producing datagrams
faster than can be forwarded by routers or processed by the destination host.

. The source-quench message in ICMP was designed to add a
kind of flow control to the IP. When a router or host discards a datagram due to congestion, it sends a source-quench message
to the sender of the datagram. This message
has two purposes. First, it informs the source that the datagram has been discarded.
Second, it warns the source that there is congestion somewhere in the path and that the
source should slow down (quench) the sending process

Time Exceeded
each datagram contains a field called time to live that controls this situation.
When a datagram visits a router, the value of this field is decremented by 1. When the
time-to-live value reaches 0, after decrementing, the router discards the datagram. However, when the datagram is discarded,
a time-exceeded message must be sent by the
router to the original source. Second, a time-exceeded message is also generated when
not all fragments that make up a message arrive at the destination host within a certain
time limit.

Parameter Problem
If a router or the destination host discovers an ambiguous or missing value in any field of the datagram,
it discards the datagram and sends a
parameter-problem message back to the source.

Redirection
Router R2 is obviously the most efficient routing choice, but host A did not choose
router R2. The datagram goes to R1 instead. Router R1, after consulting its table, finds
that the packet should have gone to R2. It sends the packet to R2 and, at the same time,
sends a redirection message to host A. Host A's routing table can now be updated.

 Query
a node sends a message that
is answered in a specific format by the destination node. A query message is encapsulated in an IP packet, 
which in tum is encapsulated in a data link layer frame.

Echo Request and Reply
. The combination of echo-request and echo-reply messages detennines whether two systems
(hosts or routers) can communicate with each other. The echo-request and echo-reply
messages can be used to determine if there is communication at the IP level. Because
ICMP messages are encapsulated in IP datagrams, the receipt of an echo-reply message
by the machine that sent the echo request is proofthat the IP protocols in the sender and
receiver are communicating with each other using the IP datagram. Also, it is proof that
the intermediate routers are receiving, processing, and forwarding IP datagrams.

Timestamp Request and Reply
Two machines (hosts or routers) can use the timestamp request and timestamp reply
messages to determine the round-trip time needed for an IP datagram to travel between
them.

Address-Mask Request and Reply
A host may know its IP address, but it may not know the corresponding mask. For
example, a host may know its IP address as 159.31.17.24, but it may not know that the
corresponding mask is /24. To obtain its mask, a host sends an address-mask-request
message to a router on the LAN. Ifthe host knows the address of the router, it sends the
request directly to the router. If it does not know, it broadcasts the message. The router
receiving the address-mask-request message responds with an address-mask-reply
message, providing the necessary mask for the host. 

Router Solicitation and Advertisement
As we discussed in the redirection message section, a host that wants to send data to a host
on another network needs to know the address of routers connected to its own network.
Also, the host must know if the routers are alive and functioning. The router-solicitation
and router-advertisement messages can help in this situation. A host can broadcast (or
multicast) a router-solicitation message. The router or routers that receive the solicitation
message broadcast their routing information using the router-advertisement message. A
router can also periodically send router-advertisement messages even if no host has solicited. 
Note that when a router sends out an advertisement, it announces not only its own
presence but also the presence of all routers on the network of which it is aware.

Checksum
we learned the concept and idea of the checksum. In ICMP the checksum
is calculated over the entire message (header and data).

Ping
We can use the ping program to find if a host is alive and responding. We use ping here
to see how it uses ICMP packets.

The ping program sends messages with sequence numbers starting from O. For each probe it
gives us the RTT time. The TTL (time to live) field in the IP datagram that encapsulates an ICMP
message has been set to 62, which means the packet cannot travel mare than 62 hops. At the beginning, ping defines the number of data bytes as 56 and the total number of bytes as 84. It is obvious
that if we add 8 bytes of ICMP header and 20 bytes of IP header to 56, the result is 84

Tracerollte
The traceroute program in UNIX or tracert in Windows can be used to trace the route
of a packet from the source to the destination. W

Given the topology, we know that a packet from host A to host B travels through
routers Rl and R2. However, most of the time, we are not aware of this topology. There
could be several routes from A to B. The traceroute program uses the ICMP messages
and the TTL (time to live) field in the IP packet to find the route.

1. The traceroute program uses the following steps to find the address of the router Rl
and the round-trip time between host A and router Rl.
a. The traceroute application at host A sends a packet to destination Busing UDP;
the message is encapsulated in an IP packet with a TTL value of 1. The program
notes the time the packet is sent.
b. Router Rl receives the packet and decrements the value of TTL to O. It then discards the packet (because TTL is 0).
The router, however, sends a time-exceeded
ICMP message (type: 11, code: 0) to show that the TTL value is 0 and the packet
was discarded.
c. The traceroute program receives the ICMP messages and uses the destination
address of the IP packet encapsulating ICMP to find the IP address of router Rl.
The program also makes note of the time the packet has arrived. The difference
between this time and the time at step a is the round-trip time.

The traceroute program repeats steps a to c three times to get a better average
round-trip time. The first trip time may be much longer than the second or third
because it takes time for the ARP program to find the physical address of router
RI. For the second and third trips, ARP has the address in its cache.

2. The traceroute program repeats the previous steps to find the address of router R2
and the round-trip time between host A and router R2. However, in this step, the
value of TTL is set to 2. So router RI forwards the message, while router R2 discards it
and sends a time-exceeded ICMP message.

3. The traceroute program repeats step 2 to find the address of host B and the round-trip
time between host A and host B. When host B receives the packet, it decrements the
value of TIL, but it does not discard the message since it has reached its final destination.
How can an ICMP message be sent back to host A? The traceroute program
uses a different strategy here. The destination port of the UDP packet is set to one
that is not supported by the UDP protocol. When host B receives the packet, it cannot
find an application program to accept the delivery. It discards the packet and sends an
ICMP destination-unreachable message (type: 3, code: 3) to host A. Note that this
situation does not happen at router RI or R2 because a router does not check the
UDP header. The traceroute program records the destination address of the arrived
IP datagram and makes note of the round-trip time. Receiving the destinationunreachable message
with a code value 3 is an indication that the whole route has
been found and there is no need to send more packets.


IGMP
The IP protocol can be involved in two types of communication: unicasting and multicasting. Unicasting is the communication between one sender and one receiver. It is a
one-to-one communication. However, some processes sometimes need to send the same
message to a large number of receivers simultaneously. This is called multicasting,
which is a one-to-many communication. 

IGMP is a group management protocol. It helps a multicast router create
and update a list ofloyal members related to each router interface.

IGMP Messages
IOMP has gone through two versions. We discuss IOMPv2, the current version. IOMPv2
has three types of messages: the query, the membership report, and the leave report.
There are two types of query messages: general and special

Joining a Group
A host or a router can join a group. A host maintains a list of processes that have membership in a group.
When a process wants to join a new group, it sends its request to the host.
The host adds the name of the process and the name of the requested group to its list. If
this is the first entry for this particular group, the host sends a membership report message.
Ifthis is not the first entry, there is no need to send the membership report since the
host is already a member ofthe group; it already receives multicast packets for this group.


In IGMP, a membership report is sent twice, one after the other.


Leaving a Group
When a host sees that no process is interested in a specific group, it sends a leave report.
Similarly, when a router sees that none of the networks connected to its interfaces is
interested in a specific group, it sends a leave report about that group.


Monitoring Membership
The multicast router is responsible
for monitoring all the hosts or routers in a LAN to see if they want to continue their
membership in a group.

The general query message does not define a particular group.

When a host or router receives the
general query message, it responds with a membership report if it is interested in a
group. However, if there is a common interest (two hosts, for example, are interested in
the same group), only one response is sent for that group to prevent unnecessary traffic.
This is called a delayed response. Note that the query message must be sent by only one
router (normally called the query router), also to prevent unnecessary traffic.

Delayed Response
To prevent unnecessary traffic, IGMP uses a delayed response strategy. When a host or
router receives a query message, it does not respond immediately; it delays the response.
Each host or router uses a random number to create a timer, which expires between I and
lOs. The expiration time can be in steps of I s or less. A timer is set for each group in the
list. For example, the timer for the first group may expire in 2 s, but the timer for the third
group may expire in 5 s.


Query Router
Query messages may create a lot of responses. To prevent unnecessary traffic, IGMP
designates one router as the query router for each network. Only this designated router
sends the query message, and the other routers are passive (they receive responses and
update their lists).


Encapsulation
The IGMP message is encapsulated in an IP datagram, which is itself encapsulated in a
frame.

The IP packet that carries an IGMP packet has a value of 1 in its TTL field

Netstat Utility
The netstat utility can be used to find the multicast addresses supported by an interface.


ICMPv6

Error Reporting
Destination Unreachable
The concept of the destination-unreachable message is exactly the same as described
for ICMP version 4.
Packet Too Big
This is a new type of message added to version 6. If a router receives a datagram that is
larger than the maximum transmission unit (MTU) size of the network through which
the datagram should pass, two things happen. First, the router discards the datagram
and then an ICMP error packet-a packet-too-big message-is sent to the source.
Time Exceeded
This message is similar to the one in version 4.
Parameter Problem
This message is similar to its version 4 counterpart.
Redirection
The purpose of the redirection message is the same as described for version 4.
Query
In addition to error reporting, ICMP can diagnose some network problems. This is
accomplished through the query messages. Four different groups of messages have been
defined: echo request and reply, router solicitation and advertisement, neighbor solicitation and advertisement, and group membership.
Echo Request and Reply
The idea and format of the echo request and reply messages are the same as those in
version 4.
Router Solicitation and Advertisement
The idea behind the router-solicitation and -advertisement messages is the same as in
version 4.
Neighbor Solicitation and Advertisement
As previously mentioned, the network layer in version 4 contains an independent protocol
called Address Resolution Protocol (ARP). In version 6, this protocol is eliminated, and
its duties are included in ICMPv6.
Group Membership
As previously mentioned, the network layer in version 4 contains an independent protocol
called IGMP. In version 6, this protocol is eliminated, and its duties are included in
ICMPv6. The purpose is exactly the same.



















 issues 
 RARP
 subnet mask ??
 It determines the  number of netid and hostid you have
 255.255.255.0
 11111111 11111111 11111111 00000000
 netid--------------------- hostid--
 
 does subnetting provides more IPs?
 
 To be able to use the protocol successfully, the RARP server has to be located in the same physical network.
 The computer sends the RARP request on the lowest layer of the network. As a result, it is not possible for a
 router to forward the packet.
 transport layer for server
 network layer for ip
 {are server and routers in diff layer?}
 
 In addition, the RARP cannot handle subnetting because no subnet masks are sent. 
 If the network has been divided into multiple subnets, an RARP server must be available in each one.
 what is the use of subnet mask here?
